hi this is pressure Locker star
basketball players always seem to get in
a rhythm they make one shot and then
they make another and soon it seems like
they can't miss surely this is evidence
of the hot hand before you get too
confident in this observation remember
that intuition is often a poor guide for
probability for example imagine a
basketball player who has a 50% accuracy
rate so that each shot is like a coin
flip if you ask people to predict the
result of ten shots they will have about
five shots being made and they'll
alternate between hits and misses in
reality many times the player will have
several hits in a row and several misses
in a row and this has nothing to do with
the player having the hot hand or being
on a cold streak this is simply the
result of random probability so what's
the answer is the hot hand actually true
in 1985 an academic study found the hot
hand was a fallacy
they said the hot hand was a
misperception of random sequences in
other words the sequences of players
making shots in a row or missing shots
in row were just the result of random
sequences a player who had made several
shots in a row was not more likely to
make the next shot than he was just to
make a regular shot in a row this study
became quite famous and for 30 years we
thought the hot hand was a fallacy a new
working paper is saying there was
actually a subtle statistical mistake in
this paper they're saying the hot hand
does exist and there's a truth to it
this is causing a little bit of
controversy where people are trying to
say why the original paper was wrong and
whether the hot hand really exists so
let's go a little bit into the
probability and see why this new working
paper actually seems to have uncovered a
statistical mistake in the original
paper
I'm going to have to talk about a little
bit of statistics and I'm going to talk
about population formulas versus sample
estimator formulas so imagine you want
to measure the average weight of all
adults and we have a population size of
n and is very big if you wanted to find
the average weight you would take the
average of each person you would add up
each person's weight and you would
divide it by the population size the
population formula for the average
weight the average mean is mu is equal
to one over n times the sum of each
person's weight now it's not often
practical to take the average weight of
millions of people so what we do in
practice is we take a random sample and
this will be for a sample of size n in
order to get an estimator of the average
weight we would actually just take the
sample of the average in the average so
our estimator our sample formula is the
is X bar is equal to one over n times
the sum of the individuals so you can
see these two formulas are actually
pretty similar the population formula
where we know each observation and the
sample formulas are pretty much the same
except we're substituting the different
sizes in our formulas but now let me ask
you another question
let's say you wanted to calculate the
variance of the weight in adults in a
population of size n the formula is to
look at the squared difference from the
mean and then divide that by the
population size n that will give you the
variance of the population so if you
wanted to do the same thing in a random
sample you might think you could just
substitute little n wherever you see big
n and instead of knowing the population
mu parameter mean we would substitute
the sample mean so you would think this
sample estimate of the variance would be
a true and valid formula for calculating
for estimating the
variance in the population however this
is a biased estimator and what are the
main problems is we don't know what the
true mean and the population is we're
relying on the fact that we're using a
sample average in order to calculate the
variance so this introduces a little bit
of bias and in order to get an unbiased
formula we actually have to divide by n
minus 1 which will make our variance in
the sample a little bigger you actually
may have encountered this formula if you
use a spreadsheet you'll see that it
actually many times they'll calculate
the sample variance and they'll divide
by n minus 1 so this is also true for
the sample standard deviation the lesson
here is that the population formula will
not always apply when you're looking at
a smaller sample sometimes the sample
formulas need to be adjusted to get an
accurate estimator of the population so
now let's return to basketball
imagine a player has a 50% accuracy rate
so that each shot is like flipping a
coin in four shots how often do you
expect to observe a shot being made a
shot hit after already seeing a hit so
there are 16 different ways that a
player can shoot with a 50 percent
accuracy rate and these will all be
equally likely now in the very first
observation where we have three misses
and then a hit there actually is no shot
after the hit so we want to know how
often do you observe a shot being made
after a shot already being made in this
first observation the hit is already in
the final shot so this observation
doesn't matter
in the next observation of all misses
there are no hits at all so these two
things will just rule out so now we have
14 different trials and we're going to
calculate how often do we observe a shot
being made after a shot already being
made well in the first trial where we
have all hits
there's a hundred percent chance that
we're going to observe a hit after a hit
in the second observation the first shot
was a hit and the second shot is also a
hit the second shot is a hit and the
third shot is also a hit however the
third shot is a hit and afterwards we
have a Miss so in two out of the three
or 66 and two-thirds percent chance in
this trial we observe a hit after a hit
so I can compute the same type of
probability in each of the different
trials so what we're doing is we're
looking at the empirical chance that
we're going to observe a shopping maid
after a shot already being made now
these fourteen trials are equally likely
and when you average this out we find a
sample estimate of only about 40% that
we observe a hit being made a shot being
made after a shot is already made and we
know this is wrong because we know the
true probability is 50% each shot is a
coin flip so after you make a shot it's
going to be a 50% chance so there's
actually a bias in the sample estimate
because a lot of times when you just
make one shot there's a miss right after
it so that puts a downward bias on our
estimate so in order to get an accurate
test of whether we observe a hit after a
shot already being made we need to
adjust the sample formula to get an
unbiased estimate of the true
probability so that brings us back to
our two papers the claim is that the
original paper actually had a mistake in
its sampling it actually was more likely
to pick sequences where you would have a
miss after a hit the new paper is saying
that when you correct for this error the
hot hand actually does exist and some
players would actually have a ten
percentage point increase in a shot
being made as after a sequence of shots
being made as opposed to a sequence of
shots being missed so they're saying the
hot hand actually does exist when you
correct for the Sam
bias so what's the lesson all this I
know so basketball analytics is a kind
of controversial topic and people don't
want to say that statistics can be
useful but I'm still gonna say we need
analytics because intuition about
probability can be very wrong but this
whole study shows us that we need to be
careful there are very subtle things
that can influence the way we collect
data and the way we analyze data but
it's pretty neat that they did find the
hot hand is probably true and this paper
still needs to undergo peer review and
be published but from what I can tell
and from the mathematics I've presented
to you it seems like the hot hand does
exist so whenever you hear a commentator
saying yeah you need to give it to him
he has the hot hand for once it seems
that analytics is supporting the
intuition that sports fans had observed
for a long time thanks for watching this
video please subscribe to my channel I
make videos on math and game theory you
can catch me on my blog mind your
decisions which you can follow on
Facebook Google+ and patreon you can
catch me on social media at pressure
Walker and if you like this video please
check out my books I've provided links
in the video description